to Jon's beloved family mrs. McCain
to Cindy and the McCain children
president mrs. Bush president Secretary
Clinton vice president and mrs. Biden
vice president mr. Cheney
Vice President Gore and as John would
say my friends we come to celebrate an
extraordinary man a warrior a statesman
a patriot who embodied so much that is
best in America President Bush and I are
among the fortunate few who competed
against John at the highest levels of
politics he made us better presidents
just as he made the Senate better just
as he made this country better so for
someone like John to ask you while he's
still alive to stand and speak of him
when he's gone is a precious and
singular honor
now when John called me with that
request earlier this year
I'll admit sadness and also a certain
surprise but after our conversation
ended I realized how well it captured
some of John's essential qualities to
start with John liked being
unpredictable even Lowell contrary he
had no interest in conforming to some
prepackaged version of what a senator
should be and he didn't want a memorial
that was going to be prepackaged either
it also showed John's disdain for
self-pity he had been to hell and back
and yet somehow never lost his energy or
his optimism or his zest for life so
cancer did not scare him and he would
maintain that buoyant spirit to the very
end too stubborn to sit still
opinionated as ever fiercely devoted to
his friends and most of all to his
family
it showed his irreverence his sense of
humor a little bit of a mischievous
streak after all what better way to get
a last laugh than to make George and I
say nice things about him to a national
audience
and most of all it showed a large inist
of spirit an ability to see past
differences in search of common ground
and in fact on the surface John and I
could not have been more different were
of different generations I came from a
broken home and never knew my father
John was the sky an of one of America's
most distinguished military families I
have a reputation for keeping cool John
not so much
we were standard bearers of different
American political traditions and
throughout my presidency John never
hesitated to tell me when he thought I
was screwing up which by his calculation
was about once a day but for all our
differences for all the times we sparked
I never tried to hide and I think John
came to understand the long-standing
admiration that I had for him by his own
account John was a rebellious young man
in his case that's understandable what
faster way to distinguish yourself when
you're the son and grandson of admirals
then to mutiny eventually though he
concluded that the only way to really
make his mark on the world is to commit
to something bigger than yourself and
for John that meant answering the
highest of callings serving his country
in a time of war others this week
and this morning have spoken to the
depths of his torment and the depths of
his courage there in the cells of Hanoi
when day after day year after year that
youthful iron was tempered into steel
and it brings to mind something that
Hemingway wrote and the book that Megan
referred to his favorite book today is
only one day in all the days that will
ever be but what will happen in all the
other days that ever come can depend on
what you do today in captivity John
learned in ways that few of us ever will
the meaning of those words how each
moment each day each choice is a test
and John McCain passed that test again
and again and again and that's why when
John spoke of virtues like service and
duty it didn't ring hollow
they weren't just words to him it was a
truth that he had lived and for which he
was prepared to die and it forced even
the most cynical to consider what were
we doing for our country what might we
risk everything for now much has been
said
this week about what a maverick John was
now in fact John was a pretty
conservative guy trust me I was on the
receiving end of some of those votes but
he did understand that some principles
transcend politics that some values
transcend party he considered it part of
his duty to uphold those principles and
uphold those values
John cared about the institutions of
self-government our Constitution our
Bill of Rights rule of law separation of
powers even the arcane rules and
procedures of the Senate he knew that in
a nation as big and boisterous and
diverse as ours those institutions those
rules those norms are what bind us
together that gives shape and order to
our common life even when we disagree
especially when we disagree John
believed in honest argument and hearing
other views he understood that if we get
in the habit of bending of the truth to
suit political expediency or party
orthodoxy our democracy will not work
that's why I was willing to buck his own
party at times occasionally work across
the aisle on campaign finance reform and
immigration reform that's why he
championed a free and independent press
as vital to our democratic debate and
the fact that it earned him some good
coverage didn't hurt either
John understood as JFK understood as
Ronald Reagan understood that part of
what makes our country great is that our
membership is based not on our bloodline
not on what we look like what our last
name SAR it's not based on where our
parents or grandparents came from or how
recently they arrived but on adherence
to a common creed that all of us are
created equal endowed by our creator
with certain inalienable rights it's
been mentioned today and we've seen
footage this week of John pushing back
against supporters who challenged my
patriotism during the 2008 campaign that
was grateful but I wasn't surprised as
Joe Lieberman said it was John's
instinct I never saw John treat anyone
differently because of their race or
religion or gender and I'm certain that
in those moments that have been referred
to during the campaign he saw himself as
defending America's character not just
mine pre considered it the imperative of
every citizen who loves this country to
treat all people fairly and finally
while John and I disagreed on all kinds
of foreign policy issues we stood
together on America's role as the one
indispensable nation believing that with
great power and great blessings comes
great responsibility that burden is
borne most heavily by our men and women
in uniform
service members like Doug Jimmy and Jack
who followed their father's footsteps as
well as the families who serve alongside
our troops but John understood that our
security and our influence was one not
just by our military might not just by
our wealth not just by our ability to
bend others to our will but from our
capacity to inspire others with our
adherence to a set of universal values
like rule of law and human rights and an
insistence on the god-given dignity of
every human being and of course John was
the first to tell us that he was not
perfect like all of us who go into
public service he did have an ego like
all of us there was no doubt some votes
he cast some compromises he struck some
decisions he made that he wished he
could add back it's no secret it's been
mentioned that he had a temper and when
it flared up it was a force of nature a
wonder to behold his jaw grinding his
face reddening his eyes boring a hole
right through you
not that I ever experienced it firsthand
mind you
but to know John was to know that as
quick as his passions might flare he was
just as quick to forgive and ask for
forgiveness he knew more than most his
own flaws in his blind spots he knew how
to laugh at himself and that
self-awareness made him all the more
compelling yeah we didn't advertise it
but every so often over the course of my
presidency John would come over to the
White House and we just sit and talk in
the Oval Office just the two of us we
talk about policy and we talk about
family and we talk about the state of
our politics and our disagreements
didn't go away during these private
conversations those were real and they
were often deep but we enjoyed the time
we shared away from the bright lights
and we laughed with each other and we
learned from each other and we never
doubted the other man's sincerity or the
other man's patriotism or that when all
was said and done we were on the same
team we never doubted we were on the
same team for all of our differences we
shared a fidelity to the ideals for
which generations of Americans have
marched and fought and sacrificed and
given their lives we considered our
political battles a privilege an
opportunity to serve as stewards of
those ideals here at home and to do our
best to advance them around the world we
saw this country as a place where
anything is possible
and citizenship citizenship as an
obligation to ensure it forever remains
that way and more than once during his
career John drew comparisons to Teddy
Roosevelt and I'm sure it's been noted
that Roosevelt's man in the arena
oration seems tailored to John most of
you know it Roosevelt speaks and those
who strive who dare to do great things
who sometimes win and sometimes come up
short but always relish a good fight a
contrast to those cold timid souls who
know neither victory nor defeat isn't
that this spirit we celebrate this week
that's striving to be better to do
better to be worthy of the great
inheritance that our founders bestowed
so much of our politics our public life
our public discourse can seem small and
mean and petty trafficking and bombast
and insulin in phony controversies and
manufactured outrage
it's a politics that pretends to be
brave and tough but in fact is born of
fear John called on us to be bigger than
that he called on us to be better than
that today is only one day and all the
days that we'll ever be but what will
happen in all the other days that will
ever come can depend on what you do
today what better way to honor John
McCain's life of service then as best we
can follow his example to prove that the
willingness to get in the arena and
fight for this country is not reserved
for the few it is open to all of us that
in fact it's demanded of all of us as
citizens of this great Republic that's
perhaps how we honor investment by
recognizing that there are some things
bigger than party or ambition or money
or fame or power that there are some
things that are worth risking everything
for principles that are eternal truths
that are abiding that is best
John showed us what that means for that
we are all deeply in his debt may God
bless John McCain may God bless this
country he served so well
[Applause]